Contents of Physics Part IClass XIICHAPTER ONEELECTRIC CHARGES AND FIELDS  CHAPTER TWOELECTROSTATIC POTENTIAL AND CAPACITANCE 5 CHAPTER THREECURRENT ELECTRICITY 93CHAPTER FOURMOVING CHARGES AND MAGNETISM  32CHAPTER FIVEMAGNETISM AND MATTER  73CHAPTER SIXELECTROMAGNETIC INDUCTION 2 4CHAPTER SEVENALTERNATING CURRENT 233CHAPTER EIGHTELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES 269 4.  INTRODUCTIONDevices in which a controlled flow of electrons can be obtained are thebasic building blocks of all the electronic circuits. Before the discovery oftransistor in  948, such devices were mostly vacuum tubes (also calledvalves) like the vacuum diode which has two electrodes, viz., anode (oftencalled plate) and cathode; triode which has three electrodes – cathode,plate and grid; tetrode and pentode (respectively with 4 and 5 electrodes).In a vacuum tube, the electrons are supplied by a heated cathode andthe controlled flow of these electrons in vacuum is obtained by varyingthe voltage between its different electrodes. Vacuum is required in theinter-electrode space; otherwise the moving electrons may lose theirenergy on collision with the air molecules in their path. In these devicesthe electrons can flow only from the cathode to the anode (i.e., only in onedirection). Therefore, such devices are generally referred to as valves.These vacuum tube devices are bulky, consume high power, operategenerally at high voltages (~    V) and have limited life and low reliability.The seed of the development of modern solid-state semiconductorelectronics goes back to  93 ’s when it was realised that some solidstatesemiconductors and their junctions offer the possibility of controllingthe number and the direction of flow of charge carriers through them.Simple excitations like light, heat or small applied voltage can changethe number of mobile charges in a semiconductor. Note that the supplyChapter FourteenSEMICONDUCTORELECTRONICS:MATERIALS, DEVICESAND SIMPLE CIRCUITS2 2 -2 Physics468and flow of charge carriers in the semiconductor devices are within thesolid itself, while in the earlier vacuum tubes/valves, the mobile electronswere obtained from a heated cathode and they were made to flow in anevacuated space or vacuum. No external heating or large evacuated spaceis required by the semiconductor devices. They are small in size, consumelow power, operate at low voltages and have long life and high reliability.Even the Cathode Ray Tubes (CRT) used in television and computermonitors which work on the principle of vacuum tubes are being replacedby Liquid Crystal Display (LCD) monitors with supporting solid stateelectronics. Much before the full implications of the semiconductor deviceswas formally understood, a naturally occurring crystal of galena (Leadsulphide, PbS) with a metal point contact attached to it was used asdetector of radio waves.In the following sections, we will introduce the basic concepts ofsemiconductor physics and discuss some semiconductor devices likejunction diodes (a 2-electrode device) and bipolar junction transistor (a3-electrode device). A few circuits illustrating their applications will alsobe described.
