SOME BASIC CONCEPTS OF CHEMISTRYScience can be viewed as a continuing human effort tosystematise knowledge for describing and understandingnature. You have learnt in your previous classes that we comeacross diverse substances present in nature and changes inthem in daily life. Curd formation from milk, formation ofvinegar from sugarcane juice on keeping for prolonged timeand rusting of iron are some of the examples of changes whichwe come across many times. For the sake of convenience,science is sub-divided into various disciplines: chemistry,physics, biology, geology, etc. The branch of science thatstudies the preparation, properties, structure and reactionsof material substances is called chemistry.DEVELOPMENT OF CHEMISTRYChemistry, as we understand it today, is not a very olddiscipline. Chemistry was not studied for its own sake, ratherit came up as a result of search for two interesting things:i. Philosopher’s stone (Paras) which would convert all baser metals e.g., iron and copper into gold.ii.‘Elexir of life’ which would grant immortality.People in ancient India, already had the knowledge of manyscientific phenomenon much before the advent of modernscience. They applied that knowledge in various walks oflife. Chemistry developed mainly in the form of Alchemyand Iatrochemistry during 3-6CE. Modernchemistry took shape in the 8th century Europe, after afew centuries of alchemical traditions which wereintroduced in Europe by the Arabs.After studying this unit, you will beable to• appreciate the contribution ofIndia in the development ofchemistry understand the role ofchemistry in different spheres oflife;• explain the characteristics ofthree states of matter;• classify different substances intoelements, compounds andmixtures;• use scientific notations anddetermine significant figures;• differentiate between precision andaccuracy;• define SI base units and convertphysical quantities from onesystem of units to another;• explain various laws of chemicalcombination;• appreciate significance of atomicmass, average atomic mass,molecular mass and formulamass;• describe the terms – mole andmolar mass;• calculate the mass per cent ofcomponent elements constitutinga compound;• determine empirical formula andmolecular formula for a compoundfrom the given experimental data;and• perform the stoichiometriccalculations.22-22 CHEMISTRYOther cultures – especially the Chinese andthe Indian – had their own alchemical traditions.These included much knowledge of chemicalprocesses and techniques.In ancient India, chemistry was calledRasayan Shastra, Rastantra, Ras Kriya orRasvidya. It included metallurgy, medicine,manufacture of cosmetics, glass, dyes, etc.Systematic excavations at Mohenjodaro inSindh and Harappa in Punjab prove that thestory of development of chemistry in India isvery old. Archaeological findings show thatbaked bricks were used in construction work.It shows the mass production of pottery, whichcan be regarded as the earliest chemical process,in which materials were mixed, moulded andsubjected to heat by using fire to achievedesirable qualities. Remains of glazed potteryhave been found in Mohenjodaro. Gypsumcement has been used in the construction work.It contains lime, sand and traces of CaCO3.Harappans made faience, a sort of glass whichwas used in ornaments. They melted and forgeda variety of objects from metals, such as lead,silver, gold and copper. They improved thehardness of copper for making artefacts byusing tin and arsenic. A number of glass objectswere found in Maski in South India (9BCE), and Hastinapur and Taxila in NorthIndia (–2 BCE). Glass and glazes werecoloured by addition of colouring agents likemetal oxides.Copper metallurgy in India dates back tothe beginning of chalcolithic cultures in thesubcontinent. There are much archeologicalevidences to support the view that technologiesfor extraction of copper and iron were developedindigenously.According to Rigveda, tanning of leatherand dying of cotton were practised during–4 BCE. The golden gloss of the blackpolished ware of northen India could not bereplicated and is still a chemical mystery. Thesewares indicate the mastery with which kilntemperatures could be controlled. Kautilya’sArthashastra describes the production of saltfrom sea.A vast number of statements and materialdescribed in the ancient Vedic literature canbe shown to agree with modern scientificfindings. Copper utensils, iron, gold, silverornaments and terracotta discs and paintedgrey pottery have been found in manyarchaeological sites in north India. SushrutaSamhita explains the importance of Alkalies.The Charaka Samhita mentions ancientindians who knew how to prepare sulphuricacid, nitric acid and oxides of copper, tin andzinc; the sulphates of copper, zinc and iron andthe carbonates of lead and iron.Rasopanishada describes the preparationof gunpowder mixture. Tamil texts alsodescribe the preparation of fireworks usingsulphur, charcoal, saltpetre (i.e., potassiumnitrate), mercury, camphor, etc.Nagarjuna was a great Indian scientist. Hewas a reputed chemist, an alchemist and ametallurgist. His work Rasratnakar deals withthe formulation of mercury compounds. He hasalso discussed methods for the extraction ofmetals, like gold, silver, tin and copper. A book,Rsarnavam, appeared around 8 CE. Itdiscusses the uses of various furnaces, ovensand crucibles for different purposes. Itdescribes methods by which metals could beidentified by flame colour.Chakrapani discovered mercury sulphide.The credit for inventing soap also goes to him.He used mustard oil and some alkalies asingredients for making soap. Indians beganmaking soaps in the 8th century CE. Oil ofEranda and seeds of Mahua plant and calciumcarbonate were used for making soap.The paintings found on the walls of Ajantaand Ellora, which look fresh even after ages,testify to a high level of science achieved inancient India. Varähmihir’s Brihat Samhita isa sort of encyclopaedia, which was composedin the sixth century CE. It informs about thepreparation of glutinous material to be appliedon walls and roofs of houses and temples. Itwas prepared entirely from extracts of variousplants, fruits, seeds and barks, which wereconcentrated by boiling, and then, treated withvarious resins. It will be interesting to test suchmaterials scientifically and assess them for use.
